Hands-On Lab: Your First Google Cloud Function - The Automated Image Processor
Lab Overview

In this lab, you will build and deploy a serverless, event-driven function on Google Cloud. The function will automatically trigger whenever a new image is uploaded to a Cloud Storage bucket. It will then read the metadata of that image and log it. This simple, powerful pattern is the foundation for many real-world applications like creating image thumbnails, analyzing data, or notifying other systems.

1. Learning Objectives

Upon completion of this lab, you will be able to:

Describe the core concepts of serverless computing and event-driven architectures.

Enable the necessary Google Cloud APIs for your project.

Create a Cloud Storage bucket to act as an event source.

Write and configure a simple Cloud Function using the Python runtime.

Deploy a Cloud Function that is triggered by a Cloud Storage event.

Test the function by uploading a file and verify its execution by inspecting logs.

2. Scenario

Imagine you are building a web application where users can upload profile pictures. Instead of having your main application server handle image processing (which can be slow and resource-intensive), you want to offload this task. You will create a system where, upon image upload, a separate, serverless function is automatically triggered to log the image's details for later processing.

3. Prerequisites

Google Cloud Platform (GCP) Account: You must have a GCP account with billing enabled. New users can take advantage of the Google Cloud Free Tier.

Project: A Google Cloud project selected for this lab.

Permissions: You need the Editor or Owner role in your project to enable APIs and create resources.

Basic Python knowledge: The code is simple, but familiarity with Python will be helpful.

4. Lab Steps

Part 1: Setting Up Your Environment
First, we need to prepare the cloud environment by enabling the necessary services and creating a place to store our images.

1. Enable Required APIs:
Every Google Cloud service needs its API enabled before use. We'll need Cloud Functions, Cloud Build (which builds your function code into a container), and Cloud Logging.

Go to the Google Cloud Console.

In the search bar at the top, search for "Cloud Functions API" and click "Enable".

Repeat this process for "Cloud Build API" and "Cloud Logging API". If they are already enabled, you're all set.

2. Create a Cloud Storage Bucket:
This bucket will be the "trigger" for our function. When a file lands here, our function will run.

In the Cloud Console, navigate to the Navigation menu (☰) > Cloud Storage > Buckets.

Click + CREATE.

Name your bucket: Give it a globally unique name. A good practice is to append your project ID, e.g., image-uploads-your-project-id.

Choose where to store your data: Select a Region (e.g., us-central1).

Leave the other settings as their default values for this lab.

Click CREATE.

Part 2: Creating the Cloud Function
Now, let's create the function itself. We'll use the Cloud Console's inline editor for simplicity.

1. Navigate to Cloud Functions:

In the Navigation menu (☰), go to Cloud Functions.

2. Configure the Function:

Click + CREATE FUNCTION.

Environment: Select 2nd gen. (This is the latest and recommended generation).

Function name: Enter log-image-metadata.

Region: Select the same region you used for your Cloud Storage bucket (e.g., us-central1).

Under Trigger, select:

Trigger type: Cloud Storage

Event type: google.cloud.storage.object.v1.finalized (This means "when a new object is created").

Bucket: Click BROWSE and select the bucket you created in Part 1.

Scroll down and expand Runtime, build and connections settings.

Under the Runtime tab, ensure Runtime service account is set to Compute Engine default service account.

Click NEXT.

Part 3: Writing and Deploying the Code
This is where you'll provide the logic for your function.

1. Configure the Code:

Runtime: Select Python 3.11 (or a recent Python version).

Source code: Keep Inline Editor selected.

Entry point: Set this to process_image_upload. This is the name of the Python function that will be executed.

2. Write the Python Code:
Replace the default code in the main.py file with the following:

Python

import functions_framework

# Register a CloudEvent function with the Functions Framework
@functions_framework.cloud_event
def process_image_upload(cloudevent):
    """
    This function is triggered when a file is uploaded to a Cloud Storage bucket.
    """
    # The CloudEvent data payload contains the metadata of the storage object.
    payload = cloudevent.data.get("protoPayload", {})
    resource_name = payload.get("resourceName", "N/A")

    # Extract bucket and file name from the resourceName
    # Format: projects/_/buckets/your-bucket-name/objects/your-file-name.jpg#166558...
    try:
        parts = resource_name.split('/')
        bucket_name = parts[3]
        file_name = parts[5].split('#')[0]

        print(f"🎉 Function triggered successfully!")
        print(f"  - Bucket: {bucket_name}")
        print(f"  - File: {file_name}")
        print(f"  - Event Type: {cloudevent.get('type')}")

    except IndexError:
        print(f"Error processing resource name: {resource_name}")
3. Update Dependencies:
In the requirements.txt file, ensure you have the following line. This package helps handle the event data.

functions-framework
4. Deploy:

Click the DEPLOY button at the bottom of the page.

Deployment will take a few minutes. You can monitor the progress by watching the spinner icon next to your function's name. Once it turns into a green checkmark, the function is ready.

Part 4: Testing and Verification
Let's trigger the function and see if it works.

1. Upload a File:

Navigate back to your Cloud Storage bucket (Navigation menu > Cloud Storage > Buckets).

Click on your bucket's name.

Click UPLOAD FILES and select any small image file from your computer.

2. Check the Logs:

Navigate back to Cloud Functions (Navigation menu > Cloud Functions).

Click on your function name, log-image-metadata.

Go to the LOGS tab.

You may need to wait a minute and click "Refresh". You should see log entries from your function's execution!

Expected Log Output:
You should see output that looks similar to this, confirming your function ran successfully:

Plaintext

🎉 Function triggered successfully!
  - Bucket: image-uploads-your-project-id
  - File: your-image-name.jpg
  - Event Type: google.cloud.storage.object.v1.finalized
5. Cleanup

To avoid incurring charges, it's important to delete the resources you created.

Delete the Cloud Function:

Go to the Cloud Functions dashboard.

Click the three-dot menu next to your function and select Delete.

Delete the Cloud Storage Bucket:

Go to the Cloud Storage Buckets page.

Select the checkbox next to your bucket and click DELETE. You will need to type the bucket name to confirm.

(Optional) Shut Down the Project:

If you created a new project just for this lab, you can shut it down by going to IAM & Admin > Settings.

6. Discussion and Further Exploration

Congratulations! You have successfully built a serverless, event-driven pipeline.

What did you achieve? You decoupled the action (uploading a file) from the reaction (processing the file). Your application can now upload files quickly without waiting for processing. The log-image-metadata function will scale automatically to handle one upload or one million uploads without any server management from you.

Next Steps (Challenge Yourself):

Easy: Modify the function to only process files that are in a specific folder within the bucket (e.g., /uploads/). Hint: Check the file_name variable.

Medium: Use the Pillow library to generate a thumbnail of the uploaded image and save it to a different Cloud Storage bucket. Hint: You would need to add Pillow to requirements.txt and add code to download the original file, resize it, and upload the new version.

Hard: Integrate with the Cloud Vision AI to analyze the uploaded image for labels (e.g., "cat", "boat", "sunset") and print those labels to the logs. Hint: You would need to enable the Vision AI API and use its client library.
